Okay, George, the tapes are rolling. Mm-hmm. Okay, you decided to be a writer at
an early age. Why did you choose science fiction? It seemed to me that science
fiction always seemed the natural kind of writing. I grew up reading science
fiction, and its materials and the kinds of possibilities that it opened up to
myself as a reader seemed to belong peculiarly to this time, as opposed to the
feeling I got when I read Charles Dickens or the 19th century writers, aside
from Wells, of course, who straddled both centuries. It seemed to belong
uniquely to the 20th century. Of course, I didn't think about it that way. That
came much later, but I think the instinctive reaction was that it was something
that was for me, and that it belonged to my time.
When you were young, you were fairly active in fandom, and you had a magazine
called Epilogue. Can you tell us a little bit about that? Well, it ran for three
issues. It started out as a publication called Viewpoint, and then the next two
issues were called Epilogue Viewpoint. They were fairly elaborately produced
magazines for their time, photo offset with as much typesetting fakery as you
could bring about in a paste-up job. I think they can be seen in Sam Moskowitz's
collection. Now, I don't even own the first two issues anymore. People like
Lester Del Rey, Judith Merrill, Michael Moorcock were published in the magazine.
We were very militant about the future possibilities of a more literate science
fiction. We were down on Burroughs and Edward E. Smith and people of that kind,
perhaps unfairly at the time. But we were very militant about things.
I guess you might say that we were the American arm of the British New Wave,
since they seemed to find those of the British New Wave who wrote in to us,
found kindred souls among us. Mike Moorcock especially, who said it was just
about the best American fanzine that he had ever read, that it set a high
standard for discussion. Even somebody like Tom Boardman, the fan, no, John
Boardman, I'm sorry, the American fan, said that here is a fanzine that sets a
standard higher than just about any other fanzine at the time. This was 1962-63.
Other people who discovered it said that it was a science fiction and fantasy
fanzine, not a fandom fanzine. There were maybe 200 copies of each one
circulated. I was quite proud of it at the time, but when I came to college, I'm
afraid it just went by the wayside.
I read that you met Arthur C. Clarke when you were quite young at a science
fiction convention. No, I went to an American Rocket Society exposition at the
Coliseum in New York, and I was looking at some displays of spaceships, and
somebody said, oh, that's the Clarke spaceship, a certain design, very much like
the lunar excursion module of later years. And I turned to my right, and
kneeling on the floor, looking at one of the pictures was Arthur C. Clarke, and
I just couldn't believe it. He later introduced me to Wernher Ron Brown and
Willie May and some of the NASA people, and I just was bowled over. I couldn't
believe this had happened to me. And he seemed very encouraging and very
interested in what I had to say, so it was very important. I'd read most of his
books up to that time, and so you can imagine how I felt. Do you still
correspond with Arthur C. Clarke? I've had occasion to reprint some of his
articles, notably in Faster Than Light, which will be out in paperback next
month, by the way. And I've corresponded to him about macro life, and I felt
that the kind of feeling that he has for, say, the solar system, almost as if he
were a regionalist of some kind, writing about his own backyard in the way that
a southern writer might be a regionalist, the way
that
he was a regionalist, the way that he was a regionalist, the way that he was a
regionalist, and he was a regionalist, and he was a regionalist, and he was a
regionalist, and he was a regionalist, and he was a regionalist,
and he was a regionalist,
and he was a regionalist, and he was a regionalist, and he was a regionalist,
and he was a regionalist, and he was a regionalist,
and he was a
regionalist, and he was a regionalist, and he was a regionalist, and he was a
regionalist, and he was a regionalist,
and he was a regionalist, and he was a regionalist, and he was a regionalist,
and he was a regionalist,
and the kind of marketplace that science fiction has just doesn't demand that
you become a philosopher, or a scientist of any original stature to write
science fiction. Fred Hoyle, Arthur Clarke, Greg Benford are very good
scientists of one kind or another, and they also use that for science fiction,
but I don't think they became scientists in order to write science fiction. That
would be a level of ambition that has not been directed at this field.
At one time, you apparently came to the crossroads of whether to devote yourself
to the academic life, presumably philosophy, or to become a full-time writer.
What kind of factors influenced your decision to become a writer instead of an
academic? Well, there had always been a tug of war. I went to college with the
thought that it couldn't hurt, and I do have a tremendous respect for the
virtues of academe, the kind of honesty that goes into original work in a
particular field. I still have a lot of regard for this, despite the fact that
individuals and individual institutions fall far short of it. But writing was a
pursuit of a certain kind of beauty, the kind of beauty that you would find in
music, perhaps. And it was always known in my philosophy department that I was
being pulled in two directions. And when the crunch came and it was clear that
there were very limited numbers of spaces in philosophy, in American philosophy
of the academic sort, I rebelled. And I saw that there was really no need for
being a philosopher in a university. They may like you to believe that you can
only be a philosopher if you are associated with a university. Many philosophers
in history have not been associated with universities. The universities now
would like to think that they own philosophy just like the English department
think that they own English literature or literature in general. And without
them, you are not a true believer. But I saw that you could perhaps go another
route. I kind of like the independence of being a freelance writer. As long as
it lasts, I mean, conceivably the market could get so bad that it would become
impossible to have this kind of career and be this kind of figure. I hope not.
I want to throw in a new question here, George. I understand that you are also a
graduate of the Clarion Science Fiction schools or groups or whatever. Did you
find that a help? Did that really set you up? Well, 1968 rolled around and I was
right at the crossroads whether to become a teaching assistant in philosophy or
whether to bite the bullet and do something to become a writer. And when Clarion
popped up in the announcement, I said, I'll go. And I got together the money and
made the effort.
I got together the
money and made the money and made the money and made the money and made the
money and made the money and made the money.
I think it's a great money and made
the money and made the money.
I think it's a
great money and made the money and made the money and made the money and made
the money and made the money and made the money and made the money and made the
money and made the money. I think it's a great
money and made the money and made the money and made the money and made the
money and made the
money and made the money and made the money and made the money and made the the
money and made
the money and made the money and made the money and made the money and made the
money and made the money and made the money and made the money and made the
money and made the
money and made the the money and made the money and made the money and made the
money and made the money and made the money and made the money and made the
money and made the money and made the money and made the money
In the past you've been critical of science fiction as a field where writers can
take the easy way out. Instead of coming up with something original they just
follow a formula and seem to be doing okay. Is this trend continuing? Getting
worse? Getting better? What? Well, if you consider that science fiction has been
anywhere between 10 and 15 percent of all fiction published, a great number of,
a great amount of it is derivative, built on pre-digested ideas and pre-digested
plots. A good example takes to the concept of space colonies or the L-5 society
type of thing. It's very often simply been used as just another place to have an
adventure of some kind or a place to set a murder mystery or a suspense story of
some kind or another. Predigestion seems to be the operative method of the
copiers. Something comes in and it's slightly new and it's not used for itself.
It's used as just another place to have another barbaric adventure or whatever.
It's easier to do this than to be original in each and every case. I'm afraid
that like many other writers I wrote what I was most influenced by. But as you
go on you realize that quite possibly there is a way of doing things that is a
little more original than that. Do writers get to the point where they have a
choice of following recipes and guaranteeing money or deciding to try something
new and risking the fact that maybe this isn't going to work out? Well the fact
is that most science fiction has sort of built in sales potential. A science
fiction book will sell anywhere between 30 or 50,000 copies no matter who wrote
it. This is unfortunate. Most of the best writers of science fiction however
become their own genres. Clark, Asimov, Heinlein are genres unto themselves
within the genre and people will buy the name no matter what they write. This is
also unfortunate but it is a sign of some progress on the part of the writer. I
think even if you write a fairly experimental kind of book like Macro Life
because of the built in potential there will be a certain number of readers who
will buy it. There will be a smaller number of people who actually buy it
because they're interested in that kind of thing. Maybe their tastes will be
widened by it. You really can't tell. You just have to do what you really want
to do. You can't simply write to fill a niche in the market. That's what strikes
me as being very cynical in many writers. They do aim for a particular audience
and they aim to deliver a certain product and they don't seem to have any other
ambitions. This would be fine if some of these writers were not capable of more,
in which case they're betraying their own abilities. This kind of comment on my
part sounds perhaps very noble to many other writers and very idealistic and
they sort of shake their heads in the way that Claggett shook his head at Billy
Budd's innocence.
But that kind of attitude comes out of the environment in which they move. And I
think you can create for yourself an ambitious environment in which you will
produce or at least have a shot at producing something that will be closer to
what you're capable of doing. Let's bring up the topic of critics in science
fiction. There don't seem to be a lot of good ones, if there ever were. What do
you think as an author that critics should look for when they're reviewing a
work? Well, they should primarily, if I were to give any advice to would-be
critics, is not to try to rewrite the book for the author and to hoist the
author by his own petard and not that of the critic. Most critics, I'm afraid,
are self-appointed. It's very easy to simply appoint yourself a reviewer or a
critic and start publishing criticism and then you acquire a few credits and you
do more. It's something that I don't believe that young writers should do at
all. I did a lot of criticism when I was just beginning and I don't think I
acquitted myself very honorably at all. You tend to overpraise on the one hand
and you tend to ignore things that you don't like. Criticism is something that
should be a very small part of any literature. There are some good critics, but
that's a career in itself. Ultimately, a good critic is a person who writes a
kind of literature. An Edmund Wilson or a Lionel Trilling or people
of that caliber are very rare. Science fiction has no good critics. After Damon
Knight, James Blish gave up. Alfred Bester was literally hounded out of
reviewing because he was so hard on everything. The people who criticize now are
people simply looking to make a name for themselves by writing reviews of better
writers' works.
In your background, you were a fan, a writer, a critic. Now let's talk a little
bit about being an editor. How did you get involved in editing? Is that
practiced at the expense of maybe not doing as much writing yourself? I think
most good writers edit because they wish to influence the field. They're curious
to see what they can elicit from other writers. I'm talking primarily about
original anthologies or original magazines which publish new stories. You do it
because you have an idea of how it should be done. As John Campbell once said,
when I edit, I am a hundred different writers. He would make suggestions to many
of his writers and they would follow through. Many of the novels of Heinlein and
Vazimov and others were originally suggestions made by John Campbell. Then each
of these writers, of course, carries out the idea in a very different way.
That's what Campbell meant by saying that I'm a hundred different writers when I
edit and I'm only one writer when I write. But that's perhaps a little too easy.
I want to edit when I do and I want to do it all the time to influence how
science fiction is written and to help produce the kinds of works that will set
a different example. And so far, I've had only limited opportunities to do this.
I've edited five anthologies, some of them original, some of them not.
I think they reflect the kind of science fiction that I would like to see
written. Although, if I really hold to the standard, I would have to say that
however well these books have done, they are failures according to my outlook.
Ultimately, you have to accept as an editor the best that you can get and that
may not reach the level that you desire.
Who broaches the subject of a book which is to be edited? Do you get called by
the publisher and he says... No, in each case, I originated the concept of the
anthology. If I was doing it in collaboration with somebody else, then the other
editor and I put this out on the market and a publisher who was interested would
simply offer his contract. Did you ever meet John Campbell? Yes, I spent six
hours at his office. I think it was in 1970, just a year or so before his death.
I don't remember the exact date. It was quite an experience.
Let's switch now to your... Would you like me to talk about Campbell? Yes,
please do. I would welcome that. I think I can sum up Campbell's attitude. He
was sitting behind his desk puffing away at his cigarette holder. Very anxious
to have a discussion that would not be him agreeing with me or me agreeing with
him. He picked up a copy, I think, of Orbit by Damon Knight and a copy of
Fantasy and Science Fiction. And he said the interesting thing is the writers in
these two books write beautifully, but they don't think very much. And he said
the great problem of science fiction is you have people who write beautifully
and don't think, and you have people who think gorgeously and can't write. And
this impressed me because I've always believed that the secret to writing
science fiction was to combine a whole set of virtues in one writer. And this
seems to be a very difficult thing to do. However, I do believe that these
various virtues that go to make good science fiction, thinking and writing well,
for example, can be developed in intelligent writers in the same way that people
develop the strength of various fingers when they practice the piano. But they
don't start early. They don't do it consciously. They don't really try. They
settle for what actually sells, and it gets published, and then they don't work
beyond that point.
I was very impressed with Campbell, and he valued disagreement above easy
agreement. He told me, if you agree with me, I'll change my mind. Great teacher
in one respect. He still has quite an influence on the field, which I know some
people don't consider all that in that much of a positive fashion. Do you think
that his influence was positive overall? I think it was positive, and I think
his disciples do not make the best case for him. They do not represent his
ideas, and I think that it's the worst of John Campbell's effect on writers and
on the publishing of science fiction that has come in for deserved attack. The
kind of interpretation of Campbell that makes sense out of Campbell's approach.
I think Greg Benford put it, Campbell basically wanted broader horizons and a
deeper sense of humanity in his writers. And that's the kind of defense that is
not made of John W. Campbell. I think that John Campbell's legitimate heirs are
people like Ursula Le Guin, Gregory Benford, perhaps Arthur C. Clarke, Philip K.
Dick, Gene Wolfe, writers who bring a sense of human character into an area of
broader horizons in ideas, in considering the future of science and technology,
in considering many of the softer sciences. I think the people who defend
Campbell along the lines of, you know, let's have more hard science and
engineering in our fiction don't really understand what he was trying to do. I
think it was James Blish who said that when you say hard science fiction, what
he meant by it is hard science fiction across the board. Hard thinking, fine
writing, hard characterization, that unity of values that I alluded to before.
That's what Campbell really pointed to. And of course, he failed to bring about
this kind of science fiction, although he had some success. Anybody would have
to fail to some degree. But I think the people who defend Campbell are usually
those who turn off the literary or ambitious writer.
Now let's change topics and discuss your individual works. Our first exposure to
you in novel form was The Omega Point, which we now know is the middle of a
trilogy. What was it intended to be when you first wrote it? Well, I originally
intended it to be a colorful, Eisensteinian space opera. Anyone who's seen the
film with Sergei Eisenstein, like Alexander Nevsky or Ivan the Terrible, would
see what I mean by that. A colorful, intense,
filled with characters who are always on edge. I simply wanted to carry out a
certain kind of aesthetic wish, and I'm afraid that I fell into a certain kind
of science fiction. The book has been called a metaphysical space opera by Peter
Nichols, a science fiction encyclopedia, and it is that. And I don't think that
it's a departure for me in any way. I think it was what I could do at the time.
There is a fair amount of my background in the story, I suppose. If I wanted to
be psychoanalytic, I came out of a ruined Europe. I grew up in England and in
New York, and I suppose the main character is also a survivor of a destroyed
people. So it's sort of allegorical, I suppose. This has happened before in
science fiction in a book called The Falling Torch by Aldous Budras, which is a
thinly disguised story about a Lithuanian exile going back to lead a revolt
against his people, the oppressors. Budras is an exile also from Soviet
-dominated Lithuania. I suppose you could say that the Omega Point dealt with
themes of this kind. I see it as the ghosts of the Hitlerian war walking through
a metaphysical space opera. And in the revenge theme, I suppose, there is a kind
of strength. The book went into seven, eight foreign editions and did quite well
in its original paperback. But I think that when I finally produce the, when the
final three volumes are produced as one book by my publishers, it will be
considerably improved. But I think it will have the same colorful space opera
kind of background. It'll never be better than a certain kind of genre science
fiction. I don't mind that kind of science fiction, but I wish it were better
done than it has been in the past.
It's going to be republished. It's going to be in an improved version. Well, in
effect, the three volumes, Ashes of the Star, The Omega Point, and I think the
third part will be called Mirror of Mind, although that's not quite certain yet.
All three volumes will have been rewritten from scratch, in effect, to produce
the kind of overall intention that I have for the books. They're really one
book. That's what they are. Why do you choose to rewrite old works instead of
just laying them aside and going on to something else? Well, this is only going
to happen. This is only going to happen twice. The middle Omega book I rewrote,
but that's because there is a larger work to which it belongs. It's a question
of making the work even throughout as to the quality of writing. I think that
although the original Omega Point had a certain kind of energy, it was a very
young book and I don't think it did as well as it should have for that theme.
It's unfinished business. That's really what it is. The same thing with Starweb,
which is the first of three volumes, so I can't just leave the first volume as
it is and do the other two volumes. The first one would stick out as a sore
thumb. In time, these six books, I suppose, will be out as two books, each one
in three parts, but they are essentially one work, so you have two books total.
So it's a question of finishing up old business. I'm not rewriting old books for
the sake of rewriting old books, and I'll probably never do this again. The
trick is to write it as well as you deserve the first time, and I think I've
done that with other works. I'll never rewrite the stories in my story
collection, for example, or rewrite Macro Life. They don't need that.
A catchy thing about the Omega Point and the sequel Ashes and Stars is that you
have all sorts of quotes interspersed among the chapters. Do you keep a notebook
of quotes? Do you purposely look for them? How do you remember them all? Well, I
do have a notebook in which I write down things that strike me, and they started
out primarily as springboards of theme and action for various parts of the Omega
trilogy, and after a while I said, well, why not put them in anyway, and the
response I've had, I probably should leave them in, although I think that in the
one volume edition they'll be set in very small type at the beginnings of each
chapter. I've been of two minds over this, whether to leave it out or not. I
don't know what they add to the overall book, but perhaps they add a kind of
thoughtfulness that would be otherwise missing.
As an aside, I definitely agree, they do. I was very happy to hear that from
somebody else besides myself. Okay, Star Web was one of the few pretty good
laser books. How did you get convinced to write a laser book? Well, as with many
other writers who came to prominence in the 70s, Roger Rowe had contacted at
least 100 writers. Other writers who had written quite a few stories for Roger
were Barry Maltzberg, Gene Wolfe, Philip Farmer, almost anyone you can think of.
Just go look in your contento bibliography and you'll see how many writers wrote
stories for Roger's endless pit of demands. I was asked to write one of the
laser books and I didn't concoct the laser book. I simply submitted a book that
I was planning to write anyway and it went over. I regret that I had to write it
in such a short period of time which is why I have rewritten it. But the proof
of perhaps the book's quality is that it has gone from a laser paperback to
volume one of a double-day trilogy in hardcover. Very few books make the passage
from paperback into hardcover. It goes the other way usually.
You had at least one other association with Roger Elwood. I think I wrote about
12 stories for him all total. They were stories that I was writing anyway and he
simply said okay I'll commission it and as soon as the story was ready it turns
out that he bought it. Roger Elwood is often reviled now for various reasons. Do
you think that he had an overall positive effect on the field? Well he Roger the
problem of Roger Elwood goes two ways. One science fiction writers are generally
irreligious.
They want to see what they write. published. Roger was a religious person I
think he's a Baptist who had some very strong ideas as to what science fiction
should be although if you look at what he bought he bought about the same kind
of thing that almost anybody else would buy. The positive effect is he gave a
lot of life and a lot of living to many many writers who would not have been
able to write and publish as much. The problem is that he brought out the worst
in many writers. He had such a large need for fiction that he bought just about
everything that most writers could produce. even works even works that he would
reject. Later when an opportunity would present itself he would buy the work. He
would get back to you and say you know that story I rejected six months ago I
think I have a place where I could use it. And then he would buy it. The
difficulty with this is that no matter what editor was doing what Roger did they
would have this problem. Namely that there is a limited amount of first rate
material. So if you had certain numbers of pages to fill he had about 70
anthologies to his credit I think. With various magazine writing stints, editing
stints, no matter who was doing what Roger did they would have to fill those
pages up especially if they'd signed contracts. So eventually the criterion
became that of minimal professionalism. If something was professional and
readable and if it fit the particular anthology in it went. And Roger ran up
against the difficulty of getting work at a high level in a short period of
time. It just can't be done. So it's partially his fault that he provided the
opportunity but I think it's also the fault of the field that the level of
writing and ambition was so low that we were producing at this level because
most of the stories he bought were not concocted for him. They were stories that
these writers were writing or had in their trunks. Many writers sold him all
their trunks of material that had not been published elsewhere. Is that clear
enough on that? That's great. That's what I wanted to know. I'll ask one more
question then we'll flip our tape. Your collection the most... Before we just go
on I'd like to say that there are half a dozen Elwood anthologies that are
outstanding and that will probably deserve to remain in print. The Continuum
series of four books Epoch Showcase just to name the best.
Okay. Your collection The Monadic Universe appeared. Three of the stories that I
came across in there, the History Machine, the Cleometricon, assuming that's the
correct pronunciation, and Stance of Splendor showed quite a divergence in style
from the other stories that you'd written. They were reminiscent of New Wave
style stories. Were you experimenting with your style in these stories? Well,
when I started out I corresponded with people like Michael Moorcock and various
other writers in England and I published quite a few stories in New Worlds and I
didn't try to particularly write for that market but I felt that here were
possibilities that I was not following through in other stories and I was very
happy to have them published. The History Machine for example was originally
commissioned for another anthology from Valentine and when that materialized
Michael Moorcock bought it. was the first thing that thing that thing that thing
that thing that